# Hello, World!

## Running a program

This is the "Hello, World!" in Formality:

```bash
import Base@0

main : Output
  print("Hello, world!")
```

Save this as `hello.fm` and run it with `fm hello/main`. This will use the interpreter to evaluate `main` and print its result. If everything works, you should see "Hello, world!" in your terminal.

Formality is a pure functional language: it has no global state or built-in IO. Instead, it just evaluates expressions, stringifies and outputs the result. As such, `Output : Type` and `print : {str : String} -> Output` are really just base-library (included on the first line) utilities that tell the CLI to pretty-print a string. `main` doesn't need to be an `Output`, though. It can be anything. For example, run this instead:

```bash
import Base@0

main : String
  "Hello, world!"
```

And it will output:

```bash
{cons, nil} => cons(1819043144,
{cons, nil} => cons(1998597231,
{cons, nil} => cons(1684828783,
{cons, nil} => nil)))
```

Which is how the string is encoded internally (a "Scott List" of 32-bit words storing an UTF-8 buffer).

## Type-checking

Formality is also a proof language, which means it includes a powerful type-checker. You can call it with `fm -t <file>/<term>`. If your program is well-typed, you'll see its type. Otherwise, you'll see an error message explaining what is wrong. For example, given the program below:

```bash
import Base@0

main : String
  42
```

If you save it as `wrong.fm` and check with `fm -t wrong/main`, you'll see:

```
[ERROR]
Type mismatch.
- Found type... Word
- Instead of... String
- When checking 42
```

Because `42` isn't a `String`. It is recommended to **always check a program's type before running it**. Ill-typed programs aren't guaranteed to run correctly. Formality won't stop you from trying, though. In fact, type annotations are optional:

```javascript
import Base@0

main
  "Hello, world!"
```

Note, though, that types are what allows Formality to verify mathematical proofs. That's because its type-system is so precise that you can specify complete algorithms with its type language. If your programs don't have types, then they can't be used in proofs at all. This will be explaned in later sections.

## Optimal reductions

One of the most interesting aspects of Formality is that its programs can be evaluated optimally, as explained on [this](https://medium.com/@maiavictor/solving-the-mystery-behind-abstract-algorithms-magical-optimizations-144225164b07) post, using an efficent graph-reduction system based on [interaction combinators](https://arxiv.org/abs/0906.0380). To run your program using the optimal reduction algorithm, use the `-o` flag. To check other flags, just type `fm` on the terminal.
